about henry moore and concrete sculptures
Henry Moore and Concrete: Cast, Carved, Coloured and Reinforced
Judith Collins

Moore used concrete, a material then associated with modernist architecture, to make sculptures between 1926 and 1934. This essay explores the corpus of his concrete work and relates it to his wider practice.
Henry Moore made in total twenty-one sculptures in concrete, all between the years 1926 and 1934. This was a period of experimentation and rapid development in his career in which he explored this new medium alongside stone and wood. As he later commented, he was then very interested in all types of sculptural media and took up concrete in part because it was becoming a more commonly used building material and he was hopeful of being commissioned to produce concrete sculptures to go with these new buildings.1 Perhaps equally important was its cheapness (he had little money then) and the different ways in which it could be worked: concrete could be cast in a mould, shaped and added to while soft, or carved when hard. It could also be coloured by pigments and incorporate other objects. Carving was his preferred mode of making sculptures during the 1920s and 1930s: famously espousing the doctrine of truth to materials, he publicly championed the view that a sculptor should carve word or stone directly in order to be able to respond to its properties rather than attempt to disguise them. But the story of Moore’s engagement with concrete shows him also alive to the possibilities of a material that could be modelled, carved and cast, and creates a more nuanced understanding of his approach to material and technique in the interwar years.
Concrete is a material invented by the Romans. It consists of a binder and a filler which, when mixed together with water, hardens. The binder is gypsum, lime or volcanic dusts such as tufa and pumice, while the filler is a range of aggregates, such as brick and ceramic rubble, ground rock and fine gravel. The quality of the aggregate affects the texture of the concrete, while its colour can be altered by the addition of pigments. After the fall of the Roman empire concrete was no longer used and only re-emerged in the nineteenth century with the invention of Portland cement in 1824. In the 1900s French architects Auguste Perret and François Hennebique pioneered the use of reinforced concrete as a building material, embedding steel bars in concrete before it set. The modernist architect Le Corbusier, who for a period worked for Auguste Perret, used reinforced concrete in his buildings in the late 1920s. One of the first examples of the use of reinforced concrete in Britain were the Lawn Road flats in Belsize Park, London, also known as the Isokon Building, designed by the architect Wells Coates and completed in 1934. Moore lived nearby and was a friend of Wells Coates, so would have been well aware of this new use of concrete. Interviewed by his photographer friend John Hedgecoe in 1968, Moore recalled, ‘At the time reinforced concrete was the new material of architecture. As I have always been interested in materials, I thought I ought to learn about the use of concrete for sculpture in case I ever wanted to connect a piece of sculpture with a concrete building.’2 He was not to get an opportunity to produce a concrete sculpture for a concrete building, but his decision to explore the medium reflected his interest in contributing to new architectural projects.3
Moore, of course, was not the first to use concrete as a material with which to make art. European artists began to employ it just before the First World War and then again in the early 1920s. German artist Wilhelm Lehmbruck (1881–1919), for example, created portrait heads and figures in a type of concrete in 1911–18, when he lived and worked in Paris and then Berlin. He added stone dust to cement powder and, mixing this with water, poured the mixture, which was described as ‘cast stone’ or ‘cement’, into moulds. The reason Lehmbruck turned to concrete is not known but it is most likely because it was freely available and inexpensive. The same motive could have applied to the Ukranian artist Alexander Archipenko (1881–1964), who lived and worked in Paris. In 1913 he made a large concrete figure called Bather. This was illustrated in the first monograph on the artist, published in 1923, a copy of which Moore owned. Hungarian artist Peter Peri (1899–1967) worked as a stonemason in his teens, before moving in 1920 to Vienna, Paris and Berlin. He joined a group of exiled left-wing Hungarian avant-garde artists, the most prominent of whom was László Moholy-Nagy (1895–1946) who was a forceful advocate of the integration of art and modern technology. At a joint exhibition at the Der Sturm Galerie, Berlin, in February 1922, Moholy-Nagy showed paintings and metal sculptures while Peri showed abstract geometric reliefs, mostly made from concrete. Peri also modelled some figures in concrete to which he added colour. After he moved to London in 1933, Peri continued making small concrete figures and reliefs using mortar (a mix of sand and Portland cement) and trowelling the mix onto shaped metal mesh. Another artist working in Britain that might be mentioned in this context is Loris Rey (1903–1962), who studied and briefly taught at Glasgow School of Art between 1923 and 1926 and was Head of Sculpture at Leeds College of Art from 1927 to 1934. He produced a concrete mother and child sculpture that was bought by the influential collector (and patron of Moore) Sir Michael Sadler. Moore was thus not alone in seeing the potential of concrete as a sculptural material but it remained an uncommon choice.
When Moore began to experiment with concrete, there were two types of cement powder or binder available to him. The most common brand was Portland cement, which is greyish in colour and made from a mixture of ground limestone and clay deposits found on the isle of Portland, near Weymouth in Dorset. Portland cement powder, when mixed with water, sets within the hour under normal conditions, cures in just over a week, and reaches maximum hardness in a month. The second, more expensive, type was a French invention called ciment fondu, a high aluminium content cement made from a mixture of limestone and bauxite. This has a setting time of two hours, reaches full strength in twenty-four hours and does not suffer from shrinkage. Moore made at least two works with this type of material: Half – Figure and Reclining Figure, both illustrated in sculptor John Mills’s book Sculpture in Cement Fondu (1958), with their medium described as ‘aluminous cement’. The fillers available to Moore were a range of fine to coarse gravels, and other materials such pulverised seashells, pumice, marble dust and sand. Moore experimented with a range of aggregates, some of which were angular particles, while others were more rounded. The success of his pieces depended on his ability to choose the right consistency of concrete for the chosen shape, and the right amount of aggregate so as not to overwhelm the surface qualities of that shape.
In 1926, as Moore began to make sculptures in concrete, he also began to consider the idea of ‘truth to material’. The concept first emerged in texts about art and design at the end of the nineteenth century, which argued that properly designed objects should be honest in how they presented themselves, celebrating the qualities of the materials from which they were made and not pretending to be something they were not. Moore became a passionate advocate of this principle, writing in Unit One in 1934: ‘Every material has its own individual qualities. It is only when the sculptor works direct, when there is an active relationship with his material, that the material can take its part in the shaping of an idea.’4 Critics seized upon such comments as a means of explaining the sometimes geometric, sometimes organically curvilinear forms of his stone and wooden pieces, as if the materials had themselves determined the shapes of his works. Concrete, however, could not be said to have inherent shape properties (though its texture and colour are potentially distinctive), and Moore’s twenty-one concrete works give the lie to a view that he was so committed to the doctrine of truth to materials in the interwar years that he did not explore other media.
Moore does not seem to have been moved to talk publicly about his use of concrete: through his life he talked about carving stone and wood with great affection but he rarely talked about his use of the manufactured material. The two leading commentators on Moore’s sculpture, Herbert Read and David Sylvester, also did not mention his concrete sculptures, except in passing. For Moore, learning to use concrete was perhaps simply something he attempted on the off chance that he might want ‘to connect a piece of sculpture with a concrete building’.5 In 1934, he was offered the experience of creating a sculpture for a new building in London, but the building was made from Portland stone and not concrete, and he was never able to put his experience to work in the context of an architectural commission. In short, his knowledge of working with concrete was never put to the test, which perhaps explains his lack of communication on the subject.
The sequence of Moore’s twenty-one concrete sculptures begins in 1926 with cast works and progresses in 1932–4 to works that were built up on a metal armature and then carved into shape. When he was interviewed by his friend, the photographer John Hedgecoe, however, he recalled the sequence differently: ‘The first method of using concrete I tried was building it up on an armature and then rubbing it down after it had set. This I had to do very quickly because the cement and the gritty aggregate mixed with it set so hard that all my tools used to wear out. Secondly I tried casting in concrete.’6 Assuming Moore’s is correct here, why are the earliest surviving works cast rather than modelled? Perhaps he never completed his very earliest pieces or destroyed those he did. The speed with which he was forced to work and the damage to his tools caused by setting concrete may also have led him to choose to experiment with casting and carving, rather than modelling. As will be seen, casting proved particularly fruitful for him, and accounts for thirteen of the known twenty-one concrete works.
In the first catalogue of his sculpture and drawings, published in 1944, Moore chose to organise his three-dimensional works according to the material used: stone, terracotta and concrete, wood, stringed figures and metal. The largest section was, predictably, that of stone, with 115 works, while the terracotta and concrete section comprised nineteen works made between 1923 and 1934. Of these thirteen were made of concrete, four of terracotta, and there were also two reliefs made from wood, plaster and gesso. The full list of twenty-one concrete works was not made public until the publication of a revised edition of the catalogue, compiled with the assistance of David Sylvester, in 1957. Here Moore chose to have his sculptures listed simply in chronological order, though he cared sufficiently to distinguish the four different ways that he had worked with concrete, describing works as ‘cast concrete’, ‘carved concrete’, ‘stone and carved concrete’ and ‘carved reinforced concrete’. The latter three are all built up on armatures.
Moore’s thirteen ‘cast concrete’ works, required concrete to have been poured into a plaster mould and left to dry and cure. Once set, he would have chipped away the plaster to reveal the concrete form inside or carefully pulled the sectioned piece mould apart. (A plaster mould is created from a modelled clay original, divided into sections by the use of clay or thin brass walls, known as shims. This technique allows the plaster mould to be removed from the original in pieces. The divisions leave slightly protruding seams or joins where the piece fitted together, and these are visible on many of Moore’s concrete sculptures).

henry moores concrete sculptures

1st work
Moore’s first cast concrete sculpture was made while he was staying with his sister Betty and her husband Rowland Howarth, who in 1922 had been appointed head teacher of Mulbarton village school, near Norwich, Norfolk. The Howarths’ second child Mary was born at their home in April 1926 and so when Moore came to stay in July she would have been around three months old. He modelled her head from life, presumably in clay, and made a plaster mould from the clay, into which he poured liquid concrete. Since the head (fig.1) is small, it is likely that it is a solid rather than a hollow cast. Moore would not have needed to use granular aggregates to bulk up the form and they would have given the tiny face too much texture. Baby’s Head is set on a cube of concrete just larger than the head itself. Although this was a very personal work, made for a close family member, Moore chose to include it in his first solo show at the Warren Gallery in 1928, where he gave it the title Little Girl. It has not been exhibited since.



3rd work
Moore’s first figure in concrete was a nude female presented from neck to mid-thigh (fig.3). The pose was angular, with the left shoulder lifted high and the arm partially hiding one of the two hemispherical breasts. By 1926 critics were noting that Moore’s style was nourished by his admiration for world art (or primitive art as it was then often called) but this figure has something of the flavour of the current European art deco movement. It specifically echoes the contrapuntal rhythms of the small nude female figures made in these years by Alexander Archipenko (1867–1964) and Ossip Zadkine (1890–1967). Moore paid regular visits to Paris in the 1920s and would have seen what these two artists were making. P.G.Konody, art critic for the Observer, reviewed Moore’s Warren Gallery solo show in January 1928, which included Torso, and stated that some of the works in the show ‘derived from intercourse with such Continental sculptors as Zadkine and Archipenko’.11 A preparatory drawing, Ideas of Sculpture: Torso 1925, is in the collection of the Art Gallery of Ontario, Canada.

14th work
Mother and Child 1930 (fig.14) was dated 1930 in the first catalogue of Moore’s sculpture, published in 1944, and again in Moore’s exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, in 1946. But its date was subsequently changed to 1932 in later editions of Moore’s catalogue raisonné. Whatever the reasons for the confusion over the date of this piece, it is clear that Moore ceased casting concrete in the late 1920s and returned to concrete in the 1930s only as a material to be carved. While earlier concrete pieces may have been chipped away in areas, this work appears to have been the first to be entirely carved and the marks of a scraping tool can be seen in the hollowed parts.20 It was bought by Sir Michael Sadler by December 1934 when his collection was catalogued. Most of his collection was sold at auction in May 1945, but this sculpture was not included. A painted plaster version of the sculpture was shown in Moore’s exhibition at the Tate Gallery in 1951.

16th work
Although abstracted, Composition 1933 (fig.16) can be seen as possessing aspects of the head and upper torso of a female figure. The large dimple at the top contains incised lines denoting perhaps an eye and a nose, while the two smaller protuberances below appear to be breasts, with the nipples rendered as concavities rather than as projections (a feature of Moore’s female figures from 1929). As with Head 1932 Moore tipped three different coloured pigments into the wet concrete mixture but did not stir them together.

21st work
The last work Moore made from concrete, Four-Piece Composition 1934 (fig.21), seems to have been made largely from cement (there is little evidence of aggregate). The title simply enumerates its elements but the work can still be read as a figure of sorts. The multi-part and horizontal nature suggests the influence of the Swiss sculptor Alberto Giacometti (1901–1966), newly part of the surrealist movement in Paris, but the piece has little or nothing of the sense of violence found in the latter’s work. Moore’s composition looks more like an assemblage of found natural objects, bones and pebbles. He was breaking up the human body into parts so that it could be explored from every angle. There is little sense of dislocation; rather there is a sense of positive enquiry. The pierced disc brings to mind the Mên-an-Tol prehistoric stone monument in Cornwall (fig.22) that was so influential for Barbara Hepworth and her work.
link ------https://www.tate.org.uk/art/research-publications/henry-moore/judith-collins-henry-moore-and-concrete-cast-carved-coloured-and-reinforced-r1172059
