 Sculptor Mr. K Narayan Rao

Artist shri Krishna rao and sri parvathamma son K Narayan rao born in the soil of Malenadu on 5th of may in 1953 in Shivamogga. 
No one has imagined that he would build his carrier in the field of art.

He started with creating dolls in soil first and later with the inspiration of his elder brother Kashinath who is also an artist,
he started creating the massive cemetric sculptures, gopuras across the Andhra border of Karnataka. 
The work of his philosopher Shri Tippajappa and shi Vishvaroopa Darashana is today recognized as a master piece of traditional art in Karnataka. 
Few of his works still holds a place in Karnataka chithrakala parishath in Bangalore.

Narayan's grandfather Parashuramappa had a great talent who excellent in the art of stone, metal casting, metal, ivory and clay.

He took special interest in creating gopura sculptures in the cement medium and accepted it as a profession. 
They wanted to keep this art flowing through the generation and never wanted to stop.
Simple works of jewelry, commitment and facial expression are the hallmark of his work. 
He learnt to sketch from S R Venkatesha who guru was MTV Aacharya.

Narayan rao created huge sculpture in cement media as revolution.
     * 85 feet statue of sri veeranjaneya at kundapur hangoor
     * prasananjanayaya, 70 feet tall, carrying the srirama lakshmana in tumkur
     * 30 feet statue  of lord shiva in varanayanagiri hubli.
     * 25feet statue of swami vivekanandha statue in ramakrishna ashrama of jingari, bangalore.
     * 65 feet panchamuki parameshwara and panchamuki anjayana in andhra pradesh, across the border 35 feet sri vishwaroopa darshana built there, 12 feet Mahalakshmi statue near Goranda, Andhra Pradesh.

*
he created the ganapathi in soil for ganesha chaturthi and created his own creativity by using mythological scenes in the background to draw people into it 
then created the idols with the help of tools
*

In world famous  Mysore dasara festival rally he won the the first prize for the Eesuro durantha  which was made for shivamogga district in 1999.

In 2000 he created a statue of 14feet gomateshwara of media plaster of paris in hassan district. 12 feet statue of attractive dharpana sundari statue in 2001. 2006 maha mastakabisheka which was the main statue. he used fiber glass, plaster of paris and m any other medium.

he was the member for karnataka shilpakala acardamy and performed as a director in many camps. Some of them are:
*1998-  karnataka shilpakala acadamy in bangalore they organised suvarna swathantrosava shibira
*1999- karnataka shilpakala acadamy in Dharvada they organised cement shilparachana shibira
* 2005- karnataka shilpakala acadamy in balari distict huvina hadagali they organised shilparachana shibira.
*2006- karnataka shilpakala acadamy in bangalore spoorthi dhama they organised cement shilparachana shibira
*2007- karnataka shilpakala academy in bangalore byatarayanapura  they directed contemprory shilparachana shibira

recognizing his achivement the deputy chief minister M P Prakash  honered in huvina adagali. In dharmastala  dharmadikari sri verendre hegade also honored for his prominent service. institute and other academy was also honored for his work in sculpture
in 2007 karnataka shilpa academy also honored for his work.

his other art works
in shimogga district sagara taluk at 1982 they build 100ft tall gopura of shri marikamba devi, witnessed the achievement of several devatha idols 

 in shimogga shri basaveshwara temple there are plenty beautiful idols 

idols of sri huccharaya swamy temple in shikaripura

they made two enthusiastic welcoming girls in enterance of the capital bengaluru railway station

in mudbidre they created the hanuman in temple

in 1984 at darmasthala lalitha park there is colorful gagavatharana view and beautifull dvarapalaka are witnessed for his talent.

in 1985 at anegudde sri vinayaka temples gopura and sculpture murals in garbagudi surrounded by the old sculpture made by him

statues of sri kannikaparameshwari temple in sakleshpura

his contribution to the epic ramayana and mahabaratha mural of vishya samaja in krishnapura mata near honnavara 
